---
title: Adding a Navigation Bar
prev: /docs/add_pages
next: /docs/add_about
---

# Adding a Navigation Bar

A navigation bar (or navbar), as the name suggests, is provided to make it easier for a user to traverse your website. It generally contains links to important sections of your website that the user would want to visit frequently, such as a page containing a list all posts in a blog. Offering a navbar lets users reduce the number of clicks needed, and mostly eliminates the need for 'Back' navigation (using the Back button in your browser).

## Structure of the Navbar

Navbars can be either horizontal or vertical in orientation, and can also choose to offer more complex navigation by providing sub-sections to the main sections via drop-down menus, or indented items.

Looking only at the HTML structure, the simple navbar is nothing but an unordered list generated by the `ul` tag, with each section being an `li` within it. The text is wrapped with a hyperlink to the corresponding location on the site.

## Styling of the Navbar

Obviously, simply using the standard `ul` tag will not give a visual anywhere close to that of navbars you might have seen on other websites. We use CSS styling in appropriate places in order to make the navbar UI consistent with the UI of the rest of the website. As a general minimum, the bullet icons are hidden and the text decorations associated with hyperlinks are removed so that we don't always have blue, underlined text. To make the design more intuitive and responsive, the link is made to activate on clicking the `box` rather than the text of the list item. The background color of the box is changed  when the mouse hovers over a link, so that the user gets visual confirmation of their actions.

[This](https://www.w3schools.com/css/css_navbar.asp) W3 schools guide provides basic implementations for some of the standard navbar structures. The code provided in these examples can easily be modified in order to customise your navbar according to your site's requirements.

## What I've done here

The Architect theme already has a custom `aside` element (class `sidebar`) that is to the right of the page by default. It then sets a transparent BG image with a gradient vertical line at the left edge, giving the illusion of a divider between the main content `div` and the sidebar.

I simply changed the float value of the sidebar from `right` to `left`, flipped the BG image, and adjusted some paddings. The navbar is just an implementation from the aforementioned W3 schools link, only difference being it is nested within the `aside`.

There are probably more elegant ways to handle this, such as removing the `aside` entirely and just including the navbar directly. If and when I make any changes, I will update them here so that you can also check out why and how I made them, and if it would be beneficial for you to follow suit.
